Microsite/reusable components (#134)
buntec/ff4s: docs/examples/reusable-components.md

# Reusable Components

The ability to factor out and reuse components, possibly across project boundaries, is an essential feature of any UI framework or library. To accomplish this in ff4s we have to work with generic state and action types. Here we illustrate the general approach with some toy examples.

We recommend organizing components into generic traits:

```scala mdoc:js:shared
import org.scalajs.dom

> import cats.Show
> import cats.kernel.Eq

Reviewer: ```suggestion
import cats._
```

import cats.syntax.all._

// S and A are the state and action types, respectively

> trait Elements[F[_], S, A] {

Reviewer: ```suggestion
trait Selects[F[_], S, A] {
```

  def customSelect[O: Show: Eq](
      fromString: String => Option[O],
      onChange: (S, O) => Option[A],
      options: List[O],
      selected: S => O
  )(implicit dsl: ff4s.Dsl[F, S, A]): dsl.V = {
    import dsl._
    import dsl.html.{onChange => onChange0, selected => selected0, _}

    useState { state =>
      select(
        onChange0 := ((ev: dom.Event) =>
          ev.target match {
            case el: dom.HTMLSelectElement =>
              fromString(el.value).flatMap(onChange(state, _))
            case _ => None
          }
        ),
        options.map { name =>
          option(
            selected0 := (name === selected(state)),
            key := name.show,
            value := name.show,
            name.show
          )
        }
      )
    }

  }

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
// more ...

}

trait Buttons[F[_], S, A] {
```

  def customButton(
      dsl: ff4s.Dsl[F, S, A]
  )(child: dsl.V, onClick: S => Option[A], isDisabled: S => Boolean): dsl.V = {
    import dsl._
    import dsl.html.{onClick => onClick0, _}

    useState { state =>
      button(
        child,
        disabled := isDisabled(state),
        onClick0 := (_ => onClick(state))
      )
    }
  }

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion

// more ...

```

}
```

> Interesting to note is how an instance of `ff4s.Dsl` is passed as parameter to the components.
> For components whose parameters' types do not depend on the dsl, the latter is passed as an implicit (in this case the `customSelect` component).
> If this is not the case, components must require the dsl to be passed explicitly (in this case the `customButton`).
> This is particularly powerful as we can pass complex HTML elements (`div`, `span`, etc ..) to the button component.
> 
> ## State

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Unfortunately, if a component takes another component as a parameter, then `dsl` cannot be passed implicitly due to dependent typing.
```

```scala mdoc:js:shared
final case class State(counter: Int = 0, fruit: Fruit = Fruit.Banana)
```

To show off our custom selection component we define an enumeration with the required `Eq` and `Show` instances.

```scala mdoc:js:shared
import cats.Show
import cats.kernel.Eq

sealed trait Fruit

object Fruit {
  case object Apple extends Fruit
  case object Banana extends Fruit
  case object Orange extends Fruit
  case object Strawberry extends Fruit

  def fromString(s: String): Option[Fruit] = s match {
    case "Apple"      => Apple.some
    case "Banana"     => Banana.some
    case "Orange"     => Orange.some
    case "Strawberry" => Strawberry.some
    case _            => none
  }

  val all = List(Apple, Banana, Orange, Strawberry)

  implicit val show: Show[Fruit] = Show.show {
    case Apple      => "Apple"
    case Banana     => "Banana"
    case Orange     => "Orange"
    case Strawberry => "Strawberry"
  }

  implicit val eq: Eq[Fruit] = Eq.fromUniversalEquals
}
```

```scala mdoc:js:shared
sealed trait Action
case class SetFruit(fruit: Fruit) extends Action
case object Inc extends Action
```

> The construction of the store is straightforward and omitted for brevity.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We omit the straightforward definition of the store.
```

With concrete state and action types we can instantiate our components and build the view.

```scala mdoc:js:shared
import cats.syntax.all._

object View extends {

  def apply[F[_]](implicit dsl: ff4s.Dsl[F, State, Action]) = {

    import dsl._
    import dsl.html._

>     object Components extends Elements[F, State, Action]
>     import Components._

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    object components extends Selects[F, State, Action] with Buttons[F, State, Action]
    import components._
```

# Reusable Components

> Reusable UI components are crucial in frontend development allowing developers to impose style uniformity and avoid code repeatability.
> Button and select components are two of the most popular UI components and will be used in this example.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The ability to factor out and reuse components, possibly across project boundaries, is an essential feature of any UI framework or library. To accomplish this in ff4s we have to work with generic state and action types. Here we illustrate the general approach with some toy examples.
```

> ## Components
> 
> Components can be implemented as member methods of a class with type parameters `F` for the effect type, `S` for the state type and `A` for the action type.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We recommend organizing components into generic traits:
```

```scala mdoc:js:shared
import org.scalajs.dom
import cats.Show
import cats.kernel.Eq
import cats.syntax.all._

> class Components[F[_], S, A] {

Reviewer: ```suggestion
// S and A are the state and action types, respectively
trait Elements[F[_], S, A] {
```

          }
        ),
        options.map { name =>
          option(
            selected0 := (name === selected(state)),
            key := name.show,
            value := name.show,
            name.show
          )
        }
      )
    }

  }

  def customButton(
      dsl: ff4s.Dsl[F, S, A]
  )(child: dsl.V, onClick: S => Option[A], isDisabled: S => Boolean): dsl.V = {
    import dsl._
    import dsl.html.{onClick => onClick0, _}

    useState { state =>
      button(
        child,
        disabled := isDisabled(state),
        onClick0 := (_ => onClick(state))
      )
    }
  }

}
```

Interesting to note is how an instance of `ff4s.Dsl` is passed as parameter to the components.
For components whose parameters' types do not depend on the dsl, the latter is passed as an implicit (in this case the `customSelect` component).
If this is not the case, components must require the dsl to be passed explicitly (in this case the `customButton`).
This is particularly powerful as we can pass complex HTML elements (`div`, `span`, etc ..) to the button component.

## State

```scala mdoc:js:shared
final case class State(counter: Int = 0, fruit: Fruit = Fruit.Banana)
```

> For this example, elements of the select component are fruits each of type `Fruit` and modelled as follows:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To show off our custom selection component we define an enumeration with the required `Eq` and `Show` instances.
```

```scala mdoc:js:shared
import cats.Show
import cats.kernel.Eq

sealed trait Fruit

object Fruit {
  case object Apple extends Fruit
  case object Banana extends Fruit
  case object Orange extends Fruit
  case object Strawberry extends Fruit

  def fromString(s: String): Option[Fruit] = s match {
    case "Apple"      => Apple.some
    case "Banana"     => Banana.some
    case "Orange"     => Orange.some
    case "Strawberry" => Strawberry.some
    case _            => none
  }

  val all = List(Apple, Banana, Orange, Strawberry)

  implicit val show: Show[Fruit] = Show.show {
    case Apple      => "Apple"
    case Banana     => "Banana"
    case Orange     => "Orange"
    case Strawberry => "Strawberry"
  }

  implicit val eq: Eq[Fruit] = Eq.fromUniversalEquals
}
```

## Actions

```scala mdoc:js:shared
sealed trait Action
case class SetFruit(fruit: Fruit) extends Action
case object Inc extends Action
```

## Store

The construction of the store is straightforward and omitted for brevity.

> ## View

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

> The interesting bit of the `View` is the instantiation of the `Components` class that allows
> us to import and use all components created.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
With concrete state and action types we can instantiate our components and build the view.
```

In this example, we illustrate how the creation of reusable UI components works using `ff4s`. Two of many,
button and select components are popular in frontend development and are going to be used in this example along with the [Frankfurter API](https://frankfurter.app).

## Components

In this example, custom select and button components are implemented as member methods of a `Components` class
with type parameters `F` for the effect type, `S` for the state type and `A` for the action type.

### Select

A select component with options of type `O` is modelled by a function with the following inputs:

1. `fromString`: converts a string option to type `O`.
2. `onChange0`: performs an action based on selected option and state.
3. `options`: list of options.
4. `selected0`: currently selected option function of the state.

### Button

Likewise for a button component inputs:

1. `onClick0`: react to click events by performing an action.
2. `isDisabled`: disable the button based on the state.

```scala mdoc:js:shared
import org.scalajs.dom
import cats.Show
import cats.kernel.Eq
import cats.syntax.all._

// Class defining all components
class Components[F[_], S, A] {

>   // Custom select component
>   def customSelect[O: Show: Eq](
>       fromString: String => Option[O],
>       onChange0: (S, O) => Option[A],
>       options: List[O],
>       selected0: S => O
>   )(implicit dsl: ff4s.Dsl[F, S, A]): dsl.V = {
>     import dsl._
>     import dsl.html._
>     useState { state =>
>       select(
>         onChange := ((ev: dom.Event) =>
>           ev.target match {
>             case el: dom.HTMLSelectElement =>
>               fromString(el.value).flatMap(onChange0(state, _))
>             case _ => None
>           }
>         ),
>         options.map { name =>
>           option(
>             selected := (name === selected0(state)), // use of Eq[O] implicit
>             key := name.show, // use of Show[O] implicit
>             value := name.show,
>             name.show
>           )
>         }
>       )
>     }

Reviewer: We can use pristine argument names and rename the imports instead
```suggestion
  def customSelect[O: Show: Eq](
      fromString: String => Option[O],
      onChange: (S, O) => Option[A],
      options: List[O],
      selected: S => O
  )(implicit dsl: ff4s.Dsl[F, S, A]): dsl.V = {
    import dsl._
    import dsl.html.{onClick => onClick0, selected => selected0, _}
    useState { state =>
      select(
        onChange0 := ((ev: dom.Event) =>
          ev.target match {
            case el: dom.HTMLSelectElement =>
              fromString(el.value).flatMap(onChange(state, _))
            case _ => None
          }
        ),
        options.map { name =>
          option(
            selected0 := (name === selected(state)),
            key := name.show,
            value := name.show,
            name.show
          )
        }
      )
    }
```

Author: nice one!

  }

>   // Custom button component
>   def customButton(
>       dsl: ff4s.Dsl[F, S, A]
>   )(child: dsl.V, onClick0: S => Option[A], isDisabled: S => Boolean): dsl.V = {
>     import dsl._
>     import dsl.html._
> 
>     useState { state =>
>       button(
>         child,
>         disabled := isDisabled(state),
>         onClick := (_ => onClick0(state))
>       )
>     }
>   }

Reviewer: Similarly as above
```suggestion
  def customButton(
      dsl: ff4s.Dsl[F, S, A]
  )(child: dsl.V, onClick: S => Option[A], isDisabled: S => Boolean): dsl.V = {
    import dsl._
    import dsl.html.{onClick => onClick0, _}

    useState { state =>
      button(
        child,
        disabled := isDisabled(state),
        onClick0 := (_ => onClick(state))
      )
    }
  }
```

}
```

Note that an instance of `ff4s.Dsl` is passed explicitly to the `customButton` function
as the `child` argument type depends explicitly on it, contrary to the select component example where
the instance is passed as an implicit.

## State

```scala mdoc:js:shared
final case class State(
    numOfRequests: Int = 0,
    currencyPair: CurrencyPair = CurrencyPair.EURUSD,
    apiResponse: Option[ApiResponse] = None
) {

  def ccyPairOption: (String, String) =
    (
      currencyPair.show.toString.take(3),
      currencyPair.show.toString.takeRight(3)
    )

}
```

```scala mdoc:js:shared
import io.circe._
import io.circe.generic.semiauto._

final case class ApiResponse(rates: Map[String, Double])
object ApiResponse {
  implicit val decoder: Decoder[ApiResponse] = deriveDecoder
}
```

In this example, the elements of `customSelect` are currency pairs. A generic currency pair is modelled by a
`CurrencyPair` trait. Specific pairs are `case object`'s extending from the latter.

```scala mdoc:js:shared
import cats.Show
import cats.kernel.Eq

> sealed trait CurrencyPair

Reviewer: I know this is a toy example, but I'm not very fond of this encoding. There are ~180 currencies, so this wouldn't scale in practice.

object CurrencyPair {
  // In this example, we choose few currency pairs
  case object EURUSD extends CurrencyPair
  case object USDCHF extends CurrencyPair
  case object GBPUSD extends CurrencyPair
  case object CHFEUR extends CurrencyPair

>   // try to parse a string to a `CurrencyPair`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

  def fromString(s: String): Option[CurrencyPair] = s match {
    case "EURUSD" => EURUSD.some
    case "USDCHF" => USDCHF.some
    case "GBPUSD" => GBPUSD.some
    case "CHFEUR" => CHFEUR.some
    case _        => none
  }

>   // all available currency pairs

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

```scala mdoc:js:shared
import cats.effect._
import cats.syntax.all._

object Store {

  def apply[F[_]: Async]: Resource[F, ff4s.Store[F, State, Action]] =
    ff4s.Store[F, State, Action](State()) { store =>
      _ match {
        case SetCurrencyPair(pair) => _.copy(currencyPair = pair) -> none
        case SetApiResponse(response) =>
          state =>
            state.copy(
              apiResponse = response,
              numOfRequests = state.numOfRequests + 1
            ) -> none
        case MakeApiRequest =>
          state =>
            (
              state,
              state.ccyPairOption.some.map { case (ccy1, ccy2) =>
                ff4s
                  .HttpClient[F]
                  .get[ApiResponse](
                    s"https://api.frankfurter.app/latest?from=$ccy1&to=$ccy2"
                  )
                  .flatMap(response =>
                    store.dispatch(SetApiResponse(response.some))
                  )

              }
            )
      }
    }
}
```

## View

```scala mdoc:js:shared
import cats.syntax.all._

object View {

  def apply[F[_]](implicit dsl: ff4s.Dsl[F, State, Action]) = {

    import dsl._
    import dsl.html._

>     // create a `Components` instance and import components

Reviewer: Obvious comments just add visual noise.
```suggestion
```

    val components = new Components[F, State, Action]
    import components._

    useState { state =>
      div(
        customSelect[CurrencyPair](
          CurrencyPair.fromString,
          (_, pair) => SetCurrencyPair(pair).some,
          CurrencyPair.all,
          _.currencyPair
        ),
        div(s"Selected currency pair: ${state.currencyPair}"),
        customButton(dsl)(

>           span("Get FX Rate"),

Reviewer: If we are not using the button in its full generality, then we might as well make it accept a string for a label and get the benefit of passing `dsl` implicitly.
